Welcome to the first PVC Morning Dawn Study Group at Padmasamyalang. We've all gathered
here. Venerable Khenpo Tsewang Rinpoches has asked the local Sangha Padmasamyalang. Now
we've been gathering for about a year or so, three times a week doing study group. And so
this is the first time Rinpoches asked us to do a live broadcast webcast. So we're here
at PSL. And then thanks for joining. We'll do an opening on prayers to the lineage. And
then we'll begin discussing our topic today is the first chapter of the Buddhist Path
by Venerable Khenpo Tsewang Rinpoches, and we'll be discussing this first chapter of
the Bhagavad Gita, which is the first of the three. And then we'll begin discussing our
topic today. So let's begin.
[Music]
So then we'll begin this. We have four main points we'll be discussing today from this
chapter, Taming Them On. So would anyone want to read this first point?
First point. Everything we experience, whether pleasant or unpleasant, is the result of causes
and conditions related to the state of our mind. The mind produces all of our experiences
and perceptions. When we tame the mind so that it rests calmly and clearly, then all
our experiences are open and relaxed. When the mind is peaceful, then simultaneously
the speech and body become peaceful. But if the mind is uncontrolled, then our words and
actions are also out of control. Until we tame the mind, experiences of joy do not last
more than a short time. No matter how many external supports we use, it is only by taming
the mind that we can truly understand ourselves and others and find ultimate peace and joy.
Pages 1, 2, and 3.
What do people think?
I have something to bring up. I thought of something here. You know, this part where
we're saying that no matter how many external supports we use, we're not going to have
any kind of lasting happiness. It's like, how can people really be convinced of that?
You know, like in our culture, we have such a materialistic consumer culture. How can
we or how can anyone really know that that's true? What's necessary, in terms of, to be
able to see that? What do we need to do to be able to see that?
Just try.
Try to see it.
Try to see it?
Just, I mean, that part too, it seems like you're, she's bringing up two points, but
that one part of looking at how we fixate on the outer conditions for our happiness or
for something. And so just even on the level of the Buddhist, you know, training of the
mind that's just learning to settle down, you know, on that part of conduct, just learning
how to just relax, even if, you know, and then there's this step of looking at the nature
of our mind, but just that level of, you know, just to like relax a little bit and actually
just be quiet and peaceful. I mean, that's one aspect and one step that I think everyone
gets some freshness from just, you know, again, it's not maybe ultimate liberation, but still,
as far as just learning to, you know, it seems to relax a little bit and not be looking out
so much or relying so much, but just actually taking the time and giving it a chance, you
know, because then of course we see the way, maybe our habits might keep looking out or
finding something to be looking at, but just that process of actually engaging.
And also just kind of how all external supports fall apart. I mean, things aren't, they're
not lasting. I mean, like you get a nice car, it's going to need new brakes, it's going
to be, you know, just like those, these conditioned things, they're like, they are, that's their
nature is to crumble at some point. So to me that's pretty convincing.
I wanted to see the conditioning as being conditioning because we're continually conditioned
again and again to think this, to think that we will every time, even if we don't read
any magazines, even if we don't watch the TV, even if we stay off the internet, we still
walk down the street when we're confronted with a billboard which has been designed using
all our weakest points to make us feel that we, if we get it, we will achieve happiness.
So in a way we need to sort of go deeper into a level beneath and just see that we're being
conditioned and that I think would lead to a suspicion, if not a kind of some form of
liberation from that. I don't think we need to see that.
It's also, I think in, even if you look at just from your experience with people, how
easily someone you think is a friend and is going to bring you happiness and oh, I have
so much fun with this person and then at some point that shifts and it can be a creation
of suffering rather than happiness and that speaks a little bit to you about that impermanent
nature of all things external until the mind is tamed, nothing that we hold outside of
ourselves is going to bring any kind of ultimate or lasting joy or happiness and I think just
that concept if it's taken in and people just look at their own life and see how many times
has that happened in our life where we think something's going to make us happy and then
two weeks later it's creating suffering and making us miserable, it's, I think, I don't
know, maybe that's how, maybe sometimes people can see that progression or that space where
we see that happiness ultimately has to come from within our own mind as does suffering.
A piece of it too seems to come out of mindfulness, you know, particularly when we're, a lot of
what life is saying when we're giving ourselves that chance to actually slow down and watch
these things and I think we went into this a little bit before in study groups about how
when we actually slow down and start to watch what's actually happening that, you know,
as we're engaging with those external things, you know, how much of it is actually happiness
and it's that mindfulness when we allow, even if, you know, a lot of times they talk about
short time but many times, you know, that coming back constantly to mindfulness and seeing
what's actually going on. I think then you get a lot of that chance to see that window
of how it's not happiness, at least not the external object.
At very least it's temporary at the very least.
And it seems like two part of what, like, I was talking about kind of just setting up
like what helps us get there, just all the teachings on like the four thoughts that turn
them up, turn the mind toward the, toward, you know, the nature of our mind and of all
phenomena, which impermanence is definitely one of them.
And then also looking at, of course, all just our favorable, beautiful conditions, both
our outer conditions and our own inner qualities, our interests, you know, we don't have time
to go through all the freedoms and endowments, but just how like Rinpoche's have said again
and again, you know, how for Dharma practitioners always beginning our sessions with those four
thoughts and just how in all of our practice, they really, I think the metaphor that Kempor
Rinpoche said is like kind of, it helps kind of soften the soil, you know, for like the
buddha seed, the seeds of our Buddha nature that begin to have some air and some growth
and begin to shine more, just contemplating those four thoughts in a way, looking at our
situation and how precious it is and some sorrow, I mean, all of the, you know, those
main points with the four enunciation thoughts, just how it really kind of sets up this situation
that kind of widens our vision and helps us tune into our own goodness qualities as well
as like how kind of temporary and fleeting everything is and how precious and beautiful
it is too, you know, kind of just really so well rounded and full like the way all the
four thoughts kind of really set up those beautiful conditions that kind of bring like
a breath of fresh air in a way and then kind of inspire us to go deeper.
Well on that same mind, like I think part of it is we have to look at the context that
we're in, you know, like Trump or Rinpoche said in cutting through spiritual materialism,
like oftentimes in the West, like or at least for most of us, we've had all these comforts
our whole lives. So we're actually in a unique position to be able to be like, wait, this
isn't enough. Like I have everything I need, you know, health, education, friends, et cetera.
And still there's like something lacking. It's like the poverty mentality, like something
but for some other people too, like maybe in other cultures or in this one, they never
had those things. So for them, it might be a little more difficult because they want
to get those things because they don't see that those things won't necessarily bring
happiness because they're lacking their basic needs. So that's one part. But I think this
poverty mentality of thinking that we don't have enough or that we're not enough or that
we need, you know, like is a really big habit, you know.
I think that uniquely the point we're at in history where we are really, really strongly
conditioned, really strongly conditioned from every side and we're consuming more media
than we ever have. And that I think one of the big ways to get out of it is just to see
why this conditioning is occurring, why, what vested interest is there in keeping us in
a state where we continue to think despite the fact that our experience proves us again
and again and again that this is not reliable, that we keep clinging to the idea that this
is reliable and that we cling to concepts because we're frightened and just accepting
that as a society, from individual to group, we are frightened and accepting that truth
and having the confidence and the bravery to confront confusion in place of that, I guess,
is important.
I'm going to just totally relate it to what you're saying. So what is it that is reliable?
I mean, it's like what's really the primary distinction between temporary happiness, lasting
happiness, something unreliable, something reliable, because it's like a key point that
we really have to discern on the path and keep coming back to like really what is lasting
because it almost seems like there's impermanent happiness and then permanent happiness. But
what is this permanent happiness because so many times in Buddhism that really at certain
levels say that it's all impermanent, impermanent, impermanent. So what is this permanent happiness
?
The permanent, you have to, as the beginning of being a Buddhist practitioner, you're told
to jump out of the safety nets of all this conditioning, which for all its horror is
fairly reassuring from time to time, even if only briefly. You're told to jump out of
that into something that to begin with is extremely uncomfortable. You're told, right,
okay, all this stuff that you're feeling, you not only have to feel that, you have to
feel guilty for it and also you don't have a self and all this kind of stuff. So you're
jumping into something very uncomfortable from being, so you just, I guess, have to have
faith because you don't see what is permanent and immediately it takes practice. You need
to move towards seeing that and I think once you've felt that and experienced that, it's
much easier to have joy in following the path there. That kind of intermediary stage where
you've kind of left and you're not quite sure if there's a net, that's really quite a scary
point. Yeah, what I wanted to say, in fact, it ties into one of my questions that I have
when I read this. When we tame the mind so that it rests calmly and clearly, then all
of our experiences are open and relaxed. So to me that's the answer, that in the taming
of the mind, when we reach our places in meditation practice, that the mind becomes more rested,
then we experience a sense of calm, peace, joy, there's a real sense of peace. Now, my
question was, what does it mean for others in the group when Rinpoche say, all of our
experiences are open and relaxed? I just would like to hear from other people what that might
mean to them. I think there's a saying that when you have a certain level of calmness
or relaxedness in the mind, you can be in the eye of the storm and there can be chaos
all around, but you can stay in that stability of that relaxed, open state no matter what
the outward circumstances are. And I think that's most, the point of practice is that
kind of mind training and taming the mind that no matter what external circumstances
coming at you, whether it's anger, whether someone's coming at you with abuse, slander,
whatever, that you've got the practice to have that stability in your own mind to see
that for what it is, to see that ultimate reality of whatever's going on here doesn't
touch this at some point in the practice, if the mind is stable, open and relaxed in
a stable way. Is that what you think is, I don't know, is that that permanent?
What is that permanent?
Stability can last for years and years and years and years and then it can stop. So what
is really the characteristic that makes it unchanging or permanent, really, not affected
by causes and conditions? Because we can be temporarily stable in that temporary stability
like for the God's realms. It lasts for billions of human years. So really how are we to
distinguish
between really that lasting happiness?
Is it that side of the wheel of life? When you exhaust all your karma and become liberated,
is that the only time that it's permanent, right? I mean that's what the teachings kind
of say.
It seems like, I think that a piece of this, just a piece of it is not the answer, is the
attachment and the grasping and that for me, it says experiences are open and relaxed.
So to me what that means is that there's this capability within us to not be holding on
tightly to what's happened.
Because if you think of what our conditioning comes down to at a really deep level, it's
basically safe, not safe. And we're just all the time trying to distinguish between like
I want this, it'll make me more safe, I don't want this, it's going to attack me. So being
open and relaxed is just losing that kind of fear that I think haunts everyone who's
not in some kind of more steady state. I think a lot of things are kind of haunted by this
feeling of feeling really profoundly unsafe and I think that the feeling up and relaxed
is just a kind of safety, that things aren't going to come and attack you, that if you
don't, you know, you cannot get this car and it's going to be fine, your wife is not going
to leave you, it's going to be okay, like you cannot buy this lipstick, you're going
to be fine because you're fine as you are. I suppose a sense of contentment as you are
and not always having to construct barricades against things and kind of decide what you
want, you know, just...
Two kind of main points I saw as reading this is Rinpoche in regards to taming the mind
or, you know, just relaxing more. There's these two aspects to taming the mind. It's like
looking at the state of our mind, kind of like, which is like how we're perceiving things,
how either limited or vast that might be, you know, how much ignorance, aversion, attachment,
hope, fear, you know, all the worldly concerns that are there, kind of more state of mind
and then through the practice of learning to just kind of calm and stabilize the state
of mind we can begin to more clearly and clearly see that that too is very temporary in a way
and that look and then to the second aspect which is seeing more the nature of our mind
which is maybe that's a little bit more becoming more and more familiar with not just the state
of our mind but the nature of our mind and like kind of just looking at those two aspects
seems like kind of it runs through the whole chapter of the way working with those two
things works and it seems like the more we can create conditions where we can become
more familiar with the nature of our mind as well as and that is the nature of everything
that we're perceiving but that's maybe part of that kind of more permanent, reliable
being so inseparable.
I think it's only that we get to that point where we're talking about the nature,
that's what's unchanging. Anything else is temporary, I mean like the states,
like you're saying, all of the states are always changing.
What I mean is what they say is that only the nature is what's not changing.
But even on subtle levels isn't that changing? Even the Buddhists say there's still that
evolution and that even the nature of mind is still evolving at some point, yeah?
What the display is there, it's a display too, it's not just a point.
It's just the recognition of the nature is developing but the nature itself is clear
from the beginning. You could be the nature if it changed.
That kind of goes into the third point that was on there about how there's that,
it's important to remember that our true nature is only temporarily hidden.
When we know that we can work with courage and joy to remove the ignorance
and let the essence of the mind shine forth,
it is important for our diligence to be based on a joyful attitude
because without joyful effort we cannot reveal this true nature.
It kind of goes into what you were highlighting before about how at first there's that moment of,
what is this? It's been a long time.
I think a lot of that is more recognizing that grasping and that attachment.
I remember when I first got into Zen, the teacher at the Zendo was talking about
how when you first start meditating it will seem like you're actually worse off than before
because the metaphor he was using is how most people are floating down a river
and meditation is learning to stand up in the river at first.
Of course it's going to feel worse because you're feeling the current,
you're feeling the current of everything that you've gone along with,
everything that you've been pulled along with and so you're feeling that.
Of course it seems much worse because now you're actually seeing everything
that used to just be an assumption.
I think that's like all of the things that were striking for you.
I think the really frightening thing is I don't know,
in London they have this thing where they announce on every tube platform
why the gap as you're stepping off the platform onto the train
and I think the sudden perception of that gap is the thing that really scares people.
When things go wrong and when suddenly something appears and you're told,
"Oh, you thought this was the case? It's not the case. That's really scary."
You're stepping into that scariness and you're saying everything
that I thought in the past may be unreliable or to analyze it
and that's a big thing I think.
And that fear, it seems to me, that fear really just comes from that grasp
and then clinging to sense of self anyway
because if you have an awareness that there is ultimately nothing to hold onto,
then there wouldn't be fear around something happening
to that thing that there's not really anything to hold onto.
That's like that analogy of jumping out of the airplane, which I love so much.
I think we've spread it up in study groups a couple of times
but really we're trying to let go.
So jumping out of the airplane, whether you have a parachute or not,
doesn't really make a difference if there's no ground, it doesn't matter.
So that's what they say in the teachings, like just letting go.
There's different methods. You can have a parachute
which will kind of slow the fall and maybe make you more comfortable with the process.
But either way...
The whole process is a bit like standing on a plane and being told,
"You can't feel your parachute. It's very small and when you push this button
it's going to come up and you go, "Okay, and we'll go, "Listen, look at all these people.
They've done it before. They're fine."
You're like, "Okay, I can't see any of them. They're beneath the clouds."
And then you just have to jump and you just hope to hell
that this small button's going to open at something.
But I think there is this profound feeling of discomfort as you're falling
that you may not be flying, you may just simply be falling.
And that's big, I think.
I think that part of this, it's tricky. It is a tricky point because open and relaxed.
Normally we think that means everything is great.
Everything is happy. Everything is good. Everything is great.
I am calm. People are nice. That's not what it means.
It means, I mean, from one sense, yes it can mean that.
Don't mean that a bit.
I was reading something last night and it was a Zen master, Shunur Suzuki.
And this one of his students, he kept asking over and over,
"But what about how to get comfortable basically? How do I get comfortable?"
And at a certain point, he just totally flew off the lid and he's like, "Spyless!"
He's like, "You all are spineless. All of you are spineless."
He's like, "You always want the sweet pill. You never want the bitter pill."
He's like, "You want to get out of suffering."
He's like, "That is not our way. This is suffering."
He's like, "Our experience, we're all going to die. We're all going to get old.
We're all going to have aches and pains. It's going to be cold outside.
We're going to be sitting. It's going to be sore. You know what I mean?"
So open and relax. I'm just emphasizing that.
It goes that way. He's saying it's the courage. It's the joyful effort.
It's not trying to totally make everything like puppies and sunshine.
You know what I mean?
But I mean from one's own mind, the way that one is working with that experience.
Aside from that, this paragraph, I was really having problems with it.
If we try to find the cause of our own unhappiness, we may think there are various things
and people in the world that cause our suffering, but this is not so.
The external factors that bring sorrow at one time can bring joy to another.
Yes and no. I think we have to look at that because riboches are a great example.
Different experiences that they went through.
Some experiences are really rough, like warfare, external circumstances.
And that's not necessarily a cause of happiness at one time.
I'm just saying that the point that they're emphasizing here and in the next paragraph
is that it's one's own mind that we can't control everything that happens.
We can't control hardly anything that happens, including our own bodies.
We get sick and have troubles, but we can work with our own minds.
It's the only thing that we can work with as a stable way.
That's why you can attain enlightenment that way.
That's how you can attain enlightenment.
Like the Buddha said many times, "All the Buddhas have a pure land, but look at you.
You're in this world. This isn't a pure land. This is samsara."
And the Buddha said, "No, this is a pure land. Everything I see is gold."
Even though he was in India, you guys have been to India, I haven't.
But they say it's rough and tumble, isn't it?
That speaks to the second point, actually. It really does.
I think it's really important what you're saying.
May I read?
An important point about disciplining the mind is that it is something that we must do for
ourselves.
We cannot depend on someone else to do it for us.
Buddha Shakyamuni taught that you are your own protector and savior.
It is through controlling the mind that you will achieve realization and develop inner wisdom.
Taming the mind does not mean eliminating outer objects or suppressing inner thoughts.
It means revealing and maintaining the natural state of mind.
When I read that, I also had some of that stickiness come up around being my own protector
and my own savior based on conditioning around what that looks like.
Even when we do the Jarmapala, that seems to me like that's protection that we're invoking and
calling in.
How does that work with, "Okay, but I'm my own protector"?
That's almost a metaphor for our own protection.
We're externalizing the mind and we're drawing it in.
Understood.
This point also spoke to me about the Guru Devotion as well.
That we get very attached to the Guru doing it for us, to the teachings, to our teachers
when they're in fact just giving us the road map and that we're the only ones that can do it for
ourselves.
I think that's a huge distinction to let go of the fact that anything outside of ourselves can do
this for us.
There's two of the three jewels, Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha.
When I read that paragraph, what kept coming to me was taming the mind does not mean eliminating
outer objects.
In one way, our teacher is the teachings.
When we see it that way, it's a great help to invigorate and stimulate our own joyful effort and
move them forward.
The other part of it was eliminating outer objects. We cannot eliminate what happens to us.
We can't eliminate what happens in this world. There are bad things that are going to happen.
The next sentence says, "It means revealing and maintaining the natural state of the mind."
Which is the second way you ask the question. What brings us?
Where does that happen? Permanent happiness.
Permanent. I'm looking at it.
Are you lying? What is the working time out?
Permanent happiness. And that's the process.
A metaphor came to me, and I would like to share it, in that a sculptor oftentimes will say
that the image is within the stone, and he has to chip away, or she has to chip away.
And that's when I think about this innate nature of loving-kindness and compassion and wisdom
that we are, you know, and our teacher is guiding us.
I know I didn't finish my sentence.
We are chipping, we are chipping, getting ourselves out.
We're losing those obscurations, those veils, but that nature is there.
That nature is there. And our job is to reveal it, right?
So I would say definitely, just related to that point, is that it seemed really clear in this
chapter for me
that this is a Mahayana view.
What's a principle distinction of Mahayana view, which also brings a lot of these questions,
is there's, in Mahayana there is Buddha nature.
And so another way, and it says this many times in this chapter,
Buddha nature, natural awareness, innate nature, pure nature, all those unchanging qualities.
So there's like a principle division that's really been helpful for me
is that we talk about mind, and there's so many types of mind, and it kind of gets confusing.
They refer to the mind, but mind is unchanging, you know?
Like eliminate the negative dispositions of mind, reveal the unchanging pure qualities of mind.
So it's kind of mind is being used differently, and even in a single sentence.
So like one principle distinction that's been helpful for me,
and it's definitely a principle distinction of Mahayana, is there is dualistic mind.
Mind is characterized by grasping, and then there's non-dual wisdom awareness, or innate nature,
and that's not characterized by grasping. Like that's the principle difference.
Grasping mind, non-grasping mind. Dualistic awareness, non-dual wisdom awareness.
And if we have that distinction, which they repeatedly say in this chapter,
eliminate ignorance, reveal the nature. This said five times in this chapter, literally.
I mean, that's the key point that's like said so many times, five times in this chapter.
And it's a big, I mean, really that distinction, and then it really can make clear about,
like even if you're looking at other teachings too, if we say, "What?"
They say mind. What is which mind? Dualistic mind? Non-dual mind.
Because it can really clarify a lot of where is the teaching coming from.
And this is definitely very much a Mahayana teaching.
And then also they say that this is a Buddha nature's principle quality of the Tantras too.
There's Buddha nature and revealing its qualities, and that's Tantra.
I mean, that's like definitely straight into Tantra.
So from the Tantra view, one would acknowledge and recognize intuitively the qualities of the
nature.
I mean, via the teachings, obviously. And then one cultivates that.
I mean, I'm kind of trying to get the difference between the Mahayana view and the Tantra view.
We have a few minutes left. Anyone want to say it after this?
We have like two minutes, summation.
I remember Japa talking about before.
Part of the difference between the Mahayana and the Tantra is about how they view the relative
truth.
They both agree on the absolute truth, on that emptiness.
What the Vajrayana and the Tantra does is it then, based on that understanding of emptiness,
looking back at the relative truth and it brings an understanding of pure relative truth.
I don't know if that's a summation.
Pure relative truth, big topic.
When they say infinite loving kindness, infinite compassion, infinite joy, infinite equanimity,
this is really another way of saying it in more Tantra terms, is a pure relative truth.
Not conditioned love, permanent love.
What is beyond temporary love and permanent love is the unconditioned love and the natural quality
of mind.
This is also revealed in Sutra Mahayana too, and Tantra Mahayana.
There's still the difference there. It's tricky.
There's still the four boundless which are infinite love, infinite compassion, those four.
It's still something there to really keep looking at, myself, definitely.
Maybe it would be a good time to bring up the fourth point.
So what's the fourth point then?
The fourth point going off of this is, all the levels of the teachings by Vodashakkimuni
are dedicated to subduing the mind and bringing out inner wisdom.
Once we are able to tame our wild thoughts, then everlasting inner peace and joy will manifest.
This is not a fairy tale. This can be demonstrated by personal experience.
Once you have this realization, your mind will be unshakable like a mountain, always calm and
peaceful.
The question I had on this, I know we're running low on time, is,
Rinpoche has said many times that if you understand relative and absolute truth, you understand all
of the teachings.
I've heard him say that many times, and when it says here that all the levels of teachings are
dedicated to subduing the mind
and bringing out inner wisdom, and yet he goes back to that constantly.
It seems like every time we have discussions or debates of any kind,
it always comes back to relative and absolute truth, pretty much at some level.
So my question is, why don't we just shut your mouth to an absolute truth?
To me, the focus and the central point of everything is literally relative and absolute truth.
He said it during Shudra, he said it so many times, that ultimately, and absolutely, and relatively
,
if you understand that, you understand all of Buddhism's visibility.
And also just what Krapa was saying about these two levels of mind, the grasping mind and the non-
dual mind,
it's the same thing, it's the relative and the absolute.
So it's just different linguistics or semantics around that concept.
All the teachings are different angles of presenting that.
They're really specific for circumstances that we experience,
so that's why I think it is important to kind of come at all these different angles.
It's like a shape that we don't quite understand, that we keep walking around,
and we can't look at this perspective however much we walk around it.
So we're just trying to stand again and again at different angles to try and make a full view of
this shape
and try to grasp it, so I guess that's all we do.
In terms of the nimma school, the full view includes at least nine levels, so nine yamas.
And Rupiches have definitely taught us many times,
each of these levels has its own view of relative and absolute truth.
So based on the view of relative and absolute truth,
then there's a specific meditation, conduct, fruition that comes from that specific way of looking
at relative and absolute truth.
They don't all agree on this, like each of them disagrees in a way,
or recognizes what the more fundamental level does,
and then kind of makes it a little more inclusive, a little less mistaking, or you could say a
little less grasping.
So the whole tendency is to go up through the levels,
refine away this more outer grasping, more subtle grasping, and then finally no grasping.
So that's the ninth level, or ata yoga, like totally free from all grasping or mistaking, you know,
sojourn.
And so the practice is like removing all grasping,
revealing the nature that was previously covered by that grasping.
But each level has its own way of defining relative and absolute truth, so this is really...
That answers my question, thank you.
I want to do like silent meditation for just really quickly, and then we'll dedicate the merit.
[singing]